You're listening to How To Be a Better Human. I'm your host, Chris Duffy. Of the many strange things about being a comedian, one of the biggest is how being paid works. I can perform the exact same jokes and get paid wildly different amounts.

Sometimes, I go to a conference and I tell my jokes and I get a very lucrative check. Other times ,I tell those same jokes at a bar, and they give me two free seltzers. It's the wild west out there when it comes to joke prices. So when I got my first TV writing job, I was really surprised to learn that I was now part of a small but powerful union called the Writer's Guild of America. All of a sudden, my work included things like minimum weekly rates, healthcare contributions, a potential pension down the road, and rules about how I could be treated by my bosses.

It was honestly shocking to me the contrast between how much better I was treated all of a sudden. It was night and day. Also, here's a funny little side note. When I moved to LA, I talked to one of the labor organizers at the union, and he told me that the zip code that I had moved into has the densest concentration of unionized comedians in the world.

So, there are people on all sides of me having a similar revelation right now. Being in a union and seeing the power and the benefits, it's really changed how I think about organizing and community power. Because the only reason that the Writer's Guild is strong is because the members are willing to stand together and risk losing out on money and work to protect each other, whether you are an established TV writer who is already well into their career, or someone just starting out like me.

So in today's episode, we're gonna dive deep into the history, power, and promise of labor organizing. It's a topic that has been in the news quite a bit lately, but many people still have kind of an outdated idea of what a union is.

And while garments, steel, and auto workers, they still have powerful labor organizations, these days, labor also includes education and healthcare—as well as baristas, tech workers, and yes, even comedy writers like me.

But even if your job is not related to a union, you can still learn how to use collective power in our own lives. How to help us understand the common struggle for rights and protections for us all. Today's guest is Stanford Political Science Professor Margaret Levi. Here's a clip from her TED Talk.

[00:02:11] Margaret Levi:
Martin Luther King exhorted us to enwrap ourselves in a single garment of destiny. I have observed several unions that I've studied, build expanded and inclusive communities of fate, in which large numbers of others recognize that their destinies are entwined despite differences and distances.

This doesn't always happen, but it can, and it must. We need, as employees and citizens, to build solidarity through communities of fate that crosses geographies and differences. But to do that, we need to reimagine labor unions for now.

[00:03:00] Chris Duffy:
After this quick break, we're gonna reimagine what the new age of worker solidarity looks like. So do not go anywhere. You don't wanna miss that.

[BREAK]

[00:03:12] Chris Duffy:
Okay, welcome back. On today's episode, we are talking labor unions and the power of collective organizing.

[00:03:19] Margaret Levi:
Hi, I’m Margaret Levy, and I'm professor of Political Science and Senior Fellow at the Center for Democracy Development and Rule of Law at Stanford University.

[00:03:30] Chris Duffy:
You know, I obviously, I, I wanna talk to you specifically about unions, but I'm also interested more broadly in how you started getting interested in inequality and solutions to inequality?

[00:03:39] Margaret Levi:
So it really goes back to the 1950s, when I was a small child, and my mother took my younger sister and I by the hand, and we marched in civil rights marches in Baltimore, Maryland, where the inequalities were clear and rampant.

Racially divided, but also divisions based on religion, on nationality, on class. So early on, and that was partially my father's influence as well, I became very interested in class and the divisions that that perpetrated and that led ultimately to an interest in labor unions.

[00:04:22] Chris Duffy:
How have labor movements or organizing played a role in your own life?

[00:04:28] Margaret Levi:
I have not actually been a member of a union because the, the two places where I have been a faculty member, unionization has not been, has not occurred successfully. I did try to organize a labor union when I was a teaching fellow as a graduate student. We failed. But boy, we tried.

[00:04:48] Chris Duffy:
Can I ask a question about that? Because I think that sometimes it's really presented as this kind of binary, you win or you lose. But do you feel like you gain something from the attempt to organize, you and your colleagues?

[00:04:59] Margaret Levi:
Oh my god, yes. Absolutely. You know, I'm a political scientist. I study collective action problems. I study power. And boy, did I learn a lot about how difficult collective action is, in part because of the variety of ways in which power can be exercised, and some of them are not with a heavy club, but with a carrot.

[00:05:21] Chris Duffy:
What did you get out of that though? Like, I mean, other than the sense of like how hard it can be, what were the victories that you feel like you took away from a—even a failed attempt at at organizing?

[00:05:30] Margaret Levi:
There was a personal benefit of feeling much better about myself. I mean, I've done the right thing. I had tried hard. I'm the kind of person who loves to learn. So just that the learning experience about power and about its variety of forms enhanced my own work and research.

[00:05:51] Chris Duffy:
This is also my own bias, but I feel like we undervalue importance of just that feeling of solidarity, of like, “Listen, we're all on the same side. Even if it doesn't end, the fact that I have people who have my back.” Yeah.

[00:06:02] Margaret Levi:
Yeah. So it's the solidarity, which is a remarkable feeling. And I felt that in those civil rights marches and in other things that I've done since I, and I have been in other failed movements like the anti-war movement, but still that feeling of solidarity is amazing.

But the other feeling that's also incredibly important is the feeling of self-respect, the feeling of dignity that you get from engaging in an action because you know it's right, and because you know it will help, not just you if it does help you, but will help other people as well. Other people who may not, for a variety of reasons.

They have families, they, they can't lose their jobs, they can't do something. They may be immigrants who are undocumented. They can't engage in particular actions and put themselves at risk in that way. So there's a feeling of rightness and goodness and self-empowerment by acting on behalf of others that I think should not be, should not be underplayed.

[00:07:02] Chris Duffy:
For those of us who aren't as well-versed in the history of labor unions, where did labor unions really come from?

[00:07:09] Margaret Levi:
The start of the labor movement goes way, way back depending on how you count it. But if we think about the contemporary labor movement, it actually probably begins with the Navy and various kinds of mutinies that occurred in the navy, including in, in relatively contemporary times, early 19th century.

But the industrial unions is, and the craft unions are really the beginning of the kind of unionization that I study. The craft unions had their origins in the medieval guilds. They developed uniquely in the 19th century in various countries: US, Germany, Britain—countries that were industrializing, and they organized first in a way to train people to do the craft and to limit, uh, access to that particular occupation as a way, both to ensure that the quality was high, but also to ensure pay was high and that the working conditions were reasonable.

So that was a first kind of form of modern industrial unionization, were the craft unions, which ranged from cigar makers to construction workers to—when electricity came in—electrical workers. The longship shore workers or the dock workers who I have studied extensively, were originally a craft union.

The next stage was the industrial unions, or what we call the industrial unions, which really organized all of the workers in a particular industry. So all of the automobile workers, all of the steelworkers, um, no matter what their particular skill or craft in the factory setting was. And that was a very important form of unionization, and those were very large scale, and therefore extremely… It led to some of the most, uh, militant actions that we think about in the history of unionization. The big steel strikes in Pittsburgh in the turn of the century period, and multiple big strikes that occurred. The sit-down strikes in the 1930s in the automobile industry, for example.

[00:09:16] Chris Duffy:
There’s so much history here, and we could do a whole podcast just on the, the history, but one of the things that I feel like comes up in maybe the pop culture understanding of unions, especially recently, is I, I hear a lot of people saying like, “If you like the weekend, thank unions, you know. If you like working nine to five, having those be your set hours, thank unions.”Those kind of, I think, are the, some of the real benefits that unions fought for, that regular people have latched onto. Are those representative of the kind of victories that unions have made, or are those kind of outliers in a, a broader struggle?

[00:09:50] Margaret Levi:
